Due Date: Monday, October 30 (11:59EDT), 2017

Chen, W.-C., Schmidt, D., and Ostrouchov, G. (2018)
"The pbdR Project: Distributed Computing with R,"
Section on Statistical Computing, JSM2018, Vancouver, BC, Canada. (Invited). 

Duration: 20 mins

Abstract:

In this talk, we introduce the Programming with Big Data in R (pbdR)
project, which is composed of several packages available at
http://pbdr.org/ and on CRAN.  Together, the packages provide a broad
parallel computing capability that spans multicore laptops through
large multi-node clusters to supercomputers. Our philosophy is to
learn from the high performance computing community, reinvent as
little as possible, and provide native R interfaces.  In particular,
pbdR aims to bring R and statistical computing to supercomputer
architectures where a combination of shared memory, distributed
memory, and co-processor hardware is available on each node for very
large scale computation on potentially very large data.

A prototype of pbdR was started around late 2011, mainly developed for
the message passing interface (MPI) environment.  Later, in 2012, the
project focused on using scalable numerical libraries (ScaLAPACK)
enlarging R's capability on high performance computing systems.
Subsequently, several statistical applications have been implemented
and applied to treascale datasets, providing interactive (sub minute)
speeds on very large systems.  In addition to providing this
supercomputer scale batch programming capability, we developed a
client-server interface in late 2015 capable of interactive
programming on very large distributed systems.  By utilizing a
high-performance asynchronous messaging library (ZeroMQ), interactive
control of a large distributed set of R sessions, cooperating in a
single program multiple data (SPMD) fashion is possible.
